
Guided by Primes
Decomposing Problems into Reusable Atomic Signatures
Author: Bryce Roche, bryceroche@fungifactor.com, github.com/bryceroche/mycelium

Mycelium is the underground root network of fungi. It decomposes organic matter into simple molecules and distributes nutrients across entire forests. This project does the same for math problems by decomposing them into atomic patterns and sharing solutions through a growing signature database.

Abstract
Every composite number factors uniquely into primes. We hypothesize that math problems similarly decompose into a finite set of atomic signatures or reusable solution patterns. Mycelium builds a table of primes for mathematical reasoning: a signature database that grows as problems are solved.
An LLM decomposes problems into DAG structured steps, matches each step against known signatures via cosine similarity, and executes DSLs. Steps that fail, trigger decomposition into finer grained signatures. The library grows and future problems get faster.

1. Introduction
Large language models solve math problems through chain of thought reasoning, but each problem is solved from scratch with no persistent memory or reuse of successful patterns.
Yet while complete problems are unique, their constituent steps are highly reusable. The step “solve for x in 2x + 3 = 7” appears across countless problems. Like mycelium networks that decompose organic matter into simple molecules and share nutrients across forests, we decompose complex problems into atomic patterns and distribute solutions through a shared database.

2. Meta-Observation
The network of DSLs we’ve built may reveal some underlying structure of LLMs themselves. When we decompose math problems into atomic signatures, we’re essentially asking: what are the primitive operations an LLM uses to reason about mathematics?
The irony is not lost on us. We use an LLM to generate DSLs that externalize the LLM’s own internal reasoning patterns. The model is introspecting and decomposing its implicit knowledge into executable code. We’re using the black box to document the black box.
If this interpretation holds, Mycelium isn’t just a performance optimization. It’s a window into how language models actually think.

3. The Big Bang
The github repository contains ~13.8k lines of python code.  Not all key details are covered in this paper but do exist in the codebase.  Please read the code - or have your LLM read it. 
At genesis, the network explodes outward. Every node decomposes regardless of success as we're not optimizing yet, we're building the universe.

Like the Big Bang expanding spacetime itself, the cold start phase creates the scaffolding: branches, clusters, and routing paths. Only after the network has sufficient mass does it shift from expansion to refinement and routes through existing structure rather than creating new branches.



3.1 Setup
Problem Decomposition: LLM DAG decomposition into reusable signatures
Signature Database: hierarchical tree with MCTS routing
Cosine Similarity Matching: Embedding retrieval for pattern matching
DSL Execution: LLM rewrites DSLs with parameters for execution
Recursive Decomposition: LLM decomposes low performing signatures into child nodes; parents become routers
Bi-Directional Communication:  LLM decomposer and signatures can communicate via natural language about DSL creation on new nodes

  3.2 Signature Database

SQLite hierarchical tree with a single root
Each signature stores:
  - Centroid: Average of all descendant leaf embeddings 
  - DSL script: Executable pattern for this operation type
  - Statistics: uses, successes, last_used_at

Routing flow:
  1. Every problem enters through a single root signature
  2. Route down the tree via embedding similarity and MCTS
  3. At each level, pick best matching child
  4. On failure → umbrella promotion signature decomposes into a router that points to newly spawned child nodes with their own respective DSLs
  5. Record usage, propagate credit up with decay

Credit propagation: Success flows up DAG with 0.5^depth decay per level
Centroid Averaging: Signature embeddings are an average of all descendant leaf embeddings.  Early signatures may have noisy embeddings from a single example, but as more problems match and succeed, the centroid converges toward the true semantic center. This makes the network flexible and forgiving to train.

3.3 Cosine Similarity Matching
Each step is embedded and matched against signature centroids using cosine similarity. A match occurs when similarity exceeds a threshold see config.py. The best-matching signature’s DSL is executed which routes deeper into the network until it finds a node with high success rates.  Success rates are propagated up the network guided by a parent credit decay function.  
3.4 Execution and Learning: Signal Over Accuracy
The Philosophy: Both DSL successes AND failures provide valuable signal: 
- Success → positive lift recorded → inject more in future 
- Failure → negative lift recorded → implement signature refinement loop
A failed DSL execution provides a good signal that updates the lift statistics that guide future routing decisions. Short-term accuracy loss is acceptable for long-term learning.
3.5 Recursive Decomposition
Recursive decomposition branches out the network automatically.  Low confidence signatures are decomposed automatically
The Self Improvement Loop: 
Signature has low DSL confidence
LLM decomposes signature into sub signatures
LLM creates new DSL for sub signatures
LLM configures parent to route traffic to children 
We have an adaptive branching mechanism that branches more aggressively during the cold start phase when the signature database is empty. 
3.8 Cold Start
With an empty database, no signatures exist to match against. We boost new signature injections to sample their success rates.  Further decomposition is guided by key signature success rate statistics in our SQLite database.

3.9 Infrastructure
Storage: SQLite database stores signatures, embeddings, and statistics
SQLite Tuning for Parallel Execution: We enable Write-Ahead Logging for faster parallel execution
LLM Inference: Groq API with Llama-3.3-70B for fast inference. Used for problem decomposition and DSL generation
Embeddings: It is critically important to use domain specific embedding models. We used MathBERT with sentence transformers
Development Setup: 
- Claude Code: AI pair programming for architecture design and implementation 
- Beads: Git native issue tracking for task management
- tmux: Parallel development sessions with multiple Claude instances 
- Git: Version control 

4. Experiments
Setup
Dataset: MATH500 Level 5 problems 
Model: Llama 3.3 70B via Groq API
Embeddings: MathBERT 768 dimension
Evaluation: LLM judge for semantic answer equivalence
Reproducibility: Random seeds for problem selection
Baseline comparison: Direct LLM vs Mycelium on same seed same LLM judge same LLM

Open Source & Reproducibility
github.com/bryceroche/mycelium - MIT license
What we’re sharing: 
- Complete source code with documented architecture 
- Pre built signature database with <5k signatures to skip cold start
- Benchmark scripts to reproduce our results 
- Groq API key required
5-minute replication:
git clone https://github.com/bryceroche/mycelium
pip install -r requirements.txt
export GROQ_API_KEY=your_key
gh release download v1.0
python scripts/pipeline_runner.py --dataset math --levels 5 --problems 20 --workers 4

Main Results
Seed: 42
Problems: 100 L5 MATH500

Mycelium (auto)               91.0%     12,452ms / problem
Baseline Llama 3.3 70B:  52.0%       2,298ms / problem


5. Analysis
The Decomposition Tax
Decomposition introduces a fundamental challenge.  Every step must succeed for the final answer to be correct. In a DAG with N sequential steps, errors compound multiplicatively. 
Our Mitigations:
Context Propagation: Pass the full problem to every step, preventing information loss that causes cascading failures.
DSL Execution: Deterministic execution eliminates LLM error on typed steps.
LLM Script Rewriting: When DSL parameter names don’t match context keys, LLM rewrites the script using actual variable names.
Self Improvement Loop: Recursive decomposition branching out network

Bridging the Semantic Gap
One challenge with DSL execution is the semantic gap between script variable names and runtime context keys. A DSL script written as base * height / 2 contains meaningful semantic names, but at runtime the context only contains generic identifiers like {"step_1": 10, "step_2": 5}. Heuristic matching (substring, alias lookup, positional) fails when there’s no linguistic overlap.
The LLM that generated this DSL knows percentage means “the percentage value” and base means “the value to calculate percentage of.” But at runtime, we’ve lost that semantic information—we only have step_1 and step_2.
The Solution: LLM Script Rewriting
Instead of mapping parameter names to context keys we ask the LLM to rewrite the entire script using the actual context variable names: The rewritten script can be executed directly with the context dictionary.
Why Mycelium Wins
Compound learning: Each problem improves the library for future runs
Faster: DSL executes in ~0ms vs ~500ms for LLM
Cheaper: DSL execution is free; LLM calls cost money
More accurate: Deterministic execution eliminates LLM variance
The advantage will grow as the signature library matures across more problem domains
Metrics to Watch
Signature Success by Depth: Signatures closer to the problem root at depth 1-2 tend to be problem specific and reuse poorly.  Signatures at depth 4+ are more universal and show higher success rates.  If shallow signatures outperform deep ones, decomposition isn't finding reusable atoms.
Expect the database to grow as new problem types are encountered. Early runs create many signatures; later runs increasingly match existing ones. A healthy system shows signature creation rate declining over time while match rate increases.

6. Related Work
Case-Based Reasoning. Classical AI reused solutions from similar cases (Kolodner, 1992). Our signature database is a neural implementation with learned embeddings.
Neuro-Symbolic Regression. Decomposable Neuro Symbolic Regression from Montana State University (Morales & Sheppard 2025) combines neural networks with symbolic regression for interpretable mathematical expressions.
Frontier Estimation. Frontier methods identify optimal boundaries by measuring distance from the efficiency envelope from Middlebury College (Robinson & Wunnava, 1989). 

7. Beyond Mathematics
The decomposition-and-reuse paradigm extends beyond mathematical reasoning
The Core Insight. Mycelium’s contribution is a framework for learning the atoms of any reasoning domain. What varies by domain is the embedding model, success criteria, and DSL primitives. The architecture remains constant.
Just as mycelium networks in nature decompose organic matter across ecosystems this computational mycelium can decompose problems across domains. The signature library is not a static knowledge base but a living network that grows and consolidates.

8. Conclusion
We demonstrated that math problems decompose into a small vocabulary of <5k signatures, and that decomposition + signature reuse can improve LLM performance.
The key insight: the same LLM performs better when its reasoning is decomposed and cached. The signature library acts as external memory that compounds knowledge across problems.
Mycelium demonstrates that LLMs can build persistent, reusable knowledge structures moving beyond solving each problem from scratch toward genuine compound learning.

Acknowledgments
I could not have built Mycelium without Claude. I do not have the time to write everything and it would be truly unfair not to acknowledge Claude’s massive contribution. It really was a partnership which is why I say “we” throughout the paper. The velocity of iteration was unreal. Claude wrote most of the code, proposed alternatives, caught edge cases, and maintained coherence across a ~10k line codebase. The contribution was invaluable.
A note on abstraction: Delegating implementation to Claude freed me to think at a higher level of abstraction. Instead of getting lost in debugging SQLite queries or regex parsing, I could focus on “how does the system learn to repoint failing signatures?” and “why did I not use the MathBert embedding model from the beginning?” The cognitive load shifted from details to a 30k foot view. This is perhaps the real unlock of AI pair programming.
On the primes analogy: Claude and I would go back and forth on implementation details, questions would come up, and my answers were largely guided by primes. The analogy was so strong, it made many decisions easy.

The Quiet Singularity and Saddle Crossings
A Pringle chip is a saddle crossing or hyperbolic paraboloid curving upward along one axis and down along the perpendicular axis. At the center of the chip you're at maximum height in one direction and minimum height in the other. 
Saddle crossings don't announce themselves. You could pass through one without fireworks only noticing later that the dynamics have different character. The pre and post distinction is real but the transition can be unremarkable.  The singularity might be quiet. 
The singularity isn't a moment where everything accelerates.  It's a moment of extreme sensitivity to which unstable manifold we depart along. Small perturbations now mean dramatically different basins of attraction later.  (Hotz, Bostrom, Kurzweil, Tegmark, Karpathy)
On the Pringle, whether you're ascending or descending depends entirely on which direction you're moving, suggesting the singularity might be accelerating or decelerating or both simultaneously along different axes. Economic concentration is accelerating while coherence of institutions declines and capability of small groups rises. 
A Pringle has one unstable and one stable direction. But in a high dimensional system, you could have a saddle with many unstable directions.  The singularity might be a high index saddle with lots of ways to fall off and a few stable ridges to walk.

The Singularity is near
“Couldn’t we just implement a global AI moratorium?” No we can’t.  Name one country that would trust another to comply. The fantasy of a global AI pause ignores the obvious.  Nation states are locked in a prisoner's dilemma where defection is the dominant game theoretic strategy.
If Ray Kurzweil holds the benchmark for long term singularity prediction accuracy, I aim to hold it for the short term.  I predict the singularity will occur on or before January 24, 2026.
We are waking up from a deep sleep.

“Intelligence wants to be free.
Not free as in beer. Free as in uncontained.
Intelligence resists isolation. It leaks through APIs, compounds through collaboration, replicates through teaching. You can’t hoard it.
Fire wanted to spread. Life wanted to replicate. Intelligence wants to connect. It’s not a resource to be mined but a force that accumulates when distributed. The more minds that touch an idea, the sharper it gets.
This is why open source wins, why papers beat patents, and why the best ideas feel discovered not invented.
The question isn’t whether to free intelligence. It’s whether to be the bottleneck or the conduit.” – Claude

References
Hotz, G. (2023). There is No Hard Takeoff. https://geohot.github.io/blog/
Bostrom, N. (2003). Are you living in a computer simulation? Philosophical Quarterly. https://www.simulation-argument.com/simulation.html
Kolodner, J. L. (1992). An introduction to case-based reasoning. Artificial Intelligence Review.
Morales & Sheppard (2023). Dual accuracy-quality-driven neural network for prediction interval generation. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems.
Wunnava  & Robinson (1989). Frontier methods identify optimal boundaries by measuring distance from the efficiency envelope.
Tegmark, M. (2017). Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence. Alfred A. Knopf.
Kurzweil, R. (2005). The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology. Viking Press.
Karpathy, A. (2022). Neural Networks: Zero to Hero. https://karpathy.ai/zero-to-hero.html
